Sizing the prize
What’s the real value of AI for 
your business and how can 
you capitalise?
+26%
+14%
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a source of both huge excitement 
and apprehension. What are the real opportunities and threats 
for your business? Drawing on a detailed analysis of the business 
impact of AI, we identify the most valuable commercial opening in 
your market and how to take advantage of them.
www.pwc.com/ AI
PwC research shows 
global GDP could be 
up to 14% higher in 
2030 as a result of 
AI – the equivalent of 
an additional $15.7 
trillion – making it the 
biggest commercial 
opportunity in today’s 
fast changing economy.
The greatest gains 
from AI are likely to be 
in China (boost of up 
to 26% GDP in 2030) 
and North America 
(potential 14% boost). 
The biggest sector 
gains will be in retail, 
financial services 
and healthcare as AI 
increases productivity, 
product quality and 
consumption.Human in the 
loop
Hardwired
/specific  
systems
Adaptive 
systems
In our broad definition, AI is a collective 
term for computer systems that can sense 
their environment, think, learn, and take 
action in response to what they’re sensing and 
their objectives.
Forms of AI in use today include digital 
assistants, chatbots and machine learning 
amongst others. 
Automated intelligence:  Automation of 
manual/cognitive and routine/non-
routine tasks.
Assisted intelligence:  Helping people to 
perform tasks faster and better.
Augmented intelligence:  Helping people to 
make better decisions.
Autonomous intelligence:  Automating 
decision making processes without human 
intervention.
As humans and machines collaborate more 
closely, and AI innovations come out of the 
research lab and into the mainstream, the 
transformational possibilities are staggering.
Defining AI 
Assisted 
Intelligence
AI systems that 
assist humans in 
making decisions 
or taking actions. 
Hard-wired 
systems that do 
not learn from 
their interactions. 
Augmented 
Intelligence
AI systems that 
augment human 
decision making 
and continuously 
learn from their 
interactions with 
humans and the 
environment.
Automation
Automation of 
manual and 
cognitive tasks that 
are either routine 
or non-routine. 
This does not 
involve new ways 
of doing things 
– it automates 
existing tasks.
No human in 
the loop
Autonomous 
Intelligence
AI systems 
that can adapt 
to different 
situations and can 
act autonomously 
without human 
assistance.
For a full glossary of AI techniques and their applications, please see page 26.Contents
Introduction:  2
Big prize, big impact 4
AI Impact Index 10
Realising the potential 20
Conclusion 22Business leaders are asking: What impact 
will AI have on my organisation, and is our 
business model threatened by AI disruption? 
And as these leaders look to capitalise on AI 
opportunities, they’re asking: Where should we 
target investment, and what kind of capabilities 
would enable us to perform better? Cutting 
across all these considerations is how to build AI 
in the responsible and transparent way needed 
to maintain the confidence of customers and 
wider stakeholders.
These are the strategic questions we’ll be 
addressing in a series of reports designed to help 
enterprises create a clear and compelling business 
case for AI investment and development. While 
there’s been a lot of research on the impact of 
automation, it’s only part of the story. In this new 
series of PwC reports, we want to highlight how 
AI can enhance and augment what enterprises 
can do, the value potential of which is as large, if 
not larger, than automation.
There’s a lot of 
expectation 
surrounding 
artificial 
intelligence 
(AI). There’s 
also a 
significant 
amount of 
wariness. 
Introduction: 
Getting down to 
what really counts
2
Sizing the prizeThe analysis carried out for this report gauges 
the economic potential for AI between now and 
2030, including for regional economies and 
eight commercial sectors worldwide. Through 
our AI Impact Index, we also look at how 
improvements to personalisation/customisation, 
quality and functionality could boost value, 
choice and demand across nearly 300 use cases 
of AI, along with how quickly transformation 
and disruption are likely to take hold. Other key 
elements of the research include in-depth sector-
by-sector analyses.
In this opening report, we outline the regional 
economies that are set to gain the most and 
the three business areas with the greatest 
AI potential in each of eight sectors. Future 
reports will focus on specific sectors, along with 
functional areas such as marketing, finance and 
talent management. We’ll also be setting out the 
detailed economic projections and, in partnership 
with Forbes magazine, publishing interviews with 
some of the business leaders at the forefront of AI.
Game changer
What comes through strongly from all the 
analysis we’ve carried out for this report is just 
how big a game changer AI is likely to be, and 
how much value potential is up for grabs. AI could 
contribute up to $15.7 trillion1 to the global 
economy in 2030, more than the current output of 
China and India combined. Of this, $6.6 trillion is 
likely to come from increased productivity and 
$9.1 trillion is likely to come from consumption-
side effects.
While some markets, sectors and individual 
businesses are more advanced than others, AI is 
still at a very early stage of development overall. 
From a macroeconomic point of view, there are 
therefore opportunities for emerging markets to 
leapfrog more developed counterparts. And within 
your business sector, one of today’s start-ups or a 
business that hasn’t even been founded yet could 
be the market leader in ten years’ time.
$15.7 trillion
1  $ denotes US dollars throughout, estimated values are expressed in real terms at 2016 prices (i.e. excluding the impact of general price inflation when looking 
ahead to 2030).
3
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?How much is at stake and why should 
you take action?
From the personal assistants in our mobile 
phones, to the profiling, customisation, and 
cyber protection that lie behind more and more 
of our commercial interactions, AI touches 
almost every aspect of our lives. And it’s only 
just getting started. 
Big prize,  
big impact:
Why AI matters
AI touches almost every 
aspect of our lives. And it’s 
only just getting started.
According to our analysis, global GDP will 
be up to 14% higher in 2030 as a result of the 
accelerating development and take-up of AI – the 
equivalent of an additional $15.7 trillion. The 
economic impact of AI will be driven by:
1. Productivity gains from businesses automating 
processes (including use of robots and 
autonomous vehicles).
2. Productivity gains from businesses 
augmenting their existing labour force with 
AI technologies (assisted and augmented 
intelligence).
3. Increased consumer demand resulting from 
the availability of personalised and/or 
higher-quality AI-enhanced products 
and services.
4
Sizing the prizeAs new technologies 
are gradually adopted and 
consumers respond to 
improved products with 
increased demand, the 
share of impact from 
product innovation 
increases over time. 
Labour productivity 
improvements are 
expected to account 
for over 55% of all 
GDP gains from 
AI over the period 
2017 – 2030. 
58% of all 
GDP gains in 2030 
will come from 
consumption side 
impacts.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18000
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030
Global GDP impact by eﬀect of AI (£trillion)
Labour Productivity Personalisation Time Saved Quality
$ trillio
n
How we gauged the impact and 
potential of AI
To estimate the impact and potential of AI, our team 
conducted an ambitious, dual-phased top-down and 
bottom-up analysis. In addition to drawing on input from 
our extensive network of clients, and sector and functional 
advisors within PwC, we’ve been working with our partners 
Fraunhofer, a global leader in emerging technology research 
and development and Forbes. Together, we set out to identify 
the most compelling examples of potential AI applications 
across each sector’s value chain, and designed a framework 
to assess the degree and pace of impact of each. In total, 
we identified and rated nearly 300 use cases, which are 
captured in our AI Impact Index.
Our Econometrics unit then used this bottom-up input as 
part of their top-down analysis assessing AI’s impact on, 
and the interactions between, key elements of the economy 
including labour, productivity, business and government. 
The models were informed by global economic datasets, 
extensive academic literature, and existing PwC work on 
automation. The analysis looked at the total economic 
impact of AI, accounting for increased productivity (which 
may involve the displacement of some existing jobs), the 
creation of new jobs, new products, and other effects. We’ll 
be publishing an extended technical read out of these results 
later in the year.
For a more detailed methodology see page 27 .
Over the past decade, almost all aspects of 
how we work and how we live – from retail to 
manufacturing to healthcare – have become 
increasingly digitised. The internet and mobile 
technologies drove the first wave of digital, 
known as the Internet of People. However, 
analysis carried out by PwC’s AI specialists 
anticipates that the data generated from the 
Internet of Things (IoT) will outstrip the data 
generated by the Internet of People many times 
over. This increased data is already resulting 
in standardisation , which naturally leads to 
automation, and the personalisation  of products 
and services, which is setting off the next wave of 
digital. AI will exploit the digital data from people 
and things to automate and assist in what we do 
today, as well as find new ways of doing things 
that we’ve not imagined before. 
Productivity gains
In the near-term, the biggest potential economic 
uplift from AI is likely to come from improved 
productivity (see Figure 1). This includes 
automation of routine tasks, augmenting 
employees’ capabilities and freeing them up to 
focus on more stimulating and higher value-
adding work. Capital-intensive sectors such as 
manufacturing and transport are likely to see 
the largest productivity gains from AI, given that 
many of their operational processes are highly 
susceptible to automation.
The impact on productivity could be competitively transformative – businesses that fail to adapt and adopt could quickly find 
themselves undercut on turnaround times as well as costs. They stand to lose a significant amount of their market share as a 
result. However, the potential of this initial phase of AI application mainly centres on enhancing what’s already being done, 
rather than creating too much that’s new.
Source: PwC analysis 
Figure 1: Where will the value gains come from with AI?
5
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?Increased consumer demand
Eventually, the GDP uplift from product 
enhancements and subsequent shifts in consumer 
demand, behaviour and consumption emanating 
from AI will overtake the productivity gains, 
potentially delivering more than $9 trillion 
of additional GDP in 2030. Consumers will be 
mostly attracted to higher quality and more 
personalised products and services, but will 
also have the chance to make better use of their 
time – think of what you could do if you no longer 
had to drive yourself to work, for example. In 
turn, increased consumption creates a virtuous 
cycle of more data touchpoints and hence more 
data, better insights, better products and hence 
more consumption. 
The consumer revolution set off by AI opens the 
way for massive disruption as both established 
businesses and new entrants drive innovation 
and develop new business models. A key part 
of the impact of AI will come from its ability to 
make the most of parallel developments such as 
IoT connectivity2. 
AI front-runners will have the advantage of 
superior customer insight. The immediate 
competitive benefits include an improved ability 
to tap into consumer preferences, tailor their 
output to match these individual demands and, 
in doing so, capture an ever bigger slice of the 
market. And the front-runners’ ability to shape 
product developments around this rich supply of 
customer data will make it harder and harder for 
slower moving competitors to keep pace and could 
eventually make their advantage unassailable. 
We can already see this data-driven innovation 
and differentiation in the way books, music, video 
and entertainment are produced, distributed and 
consumed, resulting in new business models, new 
market leaders and the elimination of traditional 
players that fail to adapt quickly enough. 
Healthcare, automotive and financial services are 
the sectors with the greatest potential for product 
enhancement and disruption due to AI according 
to our analysis. However, there is also significant 
potential for competitive advantage in particular 
areas of other sectors, ranging from on-demand 
manufacturing to sharper content targeting 
within entertainment we set out the business 
areas with most AI potential in each sector in the 
next section. 
Some job displacement – but also new 
employment opportunities
The adoption of ‘no-human-in-the-loop’ 
technologies will mean that some posts will 
inevitably become redundant, but others will be 
created by the shifts in productivity and consumer 
demand emanating from AI, and through the 
value chain of AI itself. In addition to new types 
of workers who will focus on thinking creatively 
about how AI can be developed and applied, a 
new set of personnel will be required to build, 
maintain, operate, and regulate these emerging 
technologies. For example, we will need the 
equivalent of air traffic controllers to control 
the autonomous vehicles on the road. Same day 
delivery and robotic packaging and warehousing 
are also resulting in more jobs for robots and for 
humans. All of this will facilitate the creation of 
new jobs that would not have existed in a world 
without AI.
Impact on different regions
As Figure 2 highlights, some economies have 
the potential to gain more than others in both 
absolute and relative terms. China and North 
America are likely to see the biggest impact, 
though all economies should benefit.
2  AI is the key to realising the promise of IoT as AI becomes an indispensable element of IoT solutions and the convergence of AI and IoT 
spur the development of ‘smart’ machines. We explore this further in ‘Leveraging the upcoming disruptions from AI and IoT’ (https://
www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/communications/assets/pwc-ai-and-iot.pdf)
6
Sizing the prizeFigure 2: Which regions will gain the most from AI?Figure 1: Which regions gain the most from AI?
North 
America
Total impact:
14.5% of GDP
Latin 
America
Total impact:
5.4% of GDP
($3.7trillion)
($0.5trillion)
Total impact:
5.6% of GDP
($1.2trillion)
Total impact:
11.5% of GDP
($0.7trillion)
Southern
Europe
Africa, Oceania and
other Asian markets
Total impact:
10.4% of GDP
($0.9trillion)
Developed 
Asia
Total impact:
9.9% of GDP
($1.8trillion)
Northern 
Europe
China
Total impact:
26.1% of GDP
($7.0trillion)
Developing 
countries will 
experience more 
modest increases 
due the much lower 
rates of adoption of 
AI technologies 
expected.
26.1%
14.5% 2030
North America 
and China stand to 
see the biggest 
economic gains 
with AI enhancing 
GDP by 
70%
of the global 
economic 
impact
All regions of the 
global economy will 
experience beneﬁts 
from artiﬁcial 
intelligence.
Total
$10.7
trillion
9.9%
10.4% 2030
Europe and 
Developed Asia 
will also experience 
signiﬁcant economic 
gains from AI 
enhancing 
GDP by  
11.5%
All GDP ﬁgures are reported in market exchange rate terms
All GDP ﬁgures are reported in real 2016 prices, GDP baseline based on Market Exchange Rate Basis
Net effect of AI, not growth prediction
Our results are generated using a large scale 
dynamic economic model of the global economy. 
The model is built on the Global Trade Analysis 
Project (GTAP) database. GTAP provides detail on 
the size of different economic sectors (57 in total) 
and how they trade with each other through their 
supply chains. It gives this detail on a consistent 
basis for 140 different countries.
When considering the results, there are two 
important factors that you should take into account:
1. Our results show the economic impact of AI 
only – our results may not show up directly 
into future economic growth figures, as there 
will be many positive or negative forces that 
either amplify or cancel out the potential 
effects of AI (e.g. shifts in global trade policy, 
financial booms and busts, major commodity 
price changes, geopolitical shocks etc).
2. Our economic model results are compared to a 
baseline of long-term steady state economic 
growth. The baseline is constructed from 
three key elements: population growth, 
growth in the capital stock and technological 
change. The assumed baseline rate of 
technological change is based on average 
historical trends. It’s very difficult to separate 
out how far AI will just help economies to 
achieve long-term average growth rates 
(implying the contribution from existing 
technologies phase out over time) or simply be 
additional to historical average growth rates 
(given that these will have factored in major 
technological advances of earlier periods).
These two factors mean that our results should be 
interpreted as the potential ‘size of the economic 
prize’ associated with AI, as opposed to direct 
estimates of future economic growth.
Source: PwC analysis 
7
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?North America
In North America, the potential uplift to GDP from 
AI will be amplified by the huge opportunities to 
introduce more productive technologies, many 
of which are ready to be applied. And the gains 
will be accelerated by the advanced technological 
and consumer readiness for AI, along with the 
impact of rapid accumulation of assets – not just 
technology, but data touchpoints and the flows 
of information and customer insight that come 
with them. 
North America is likely to see the fastest boost in 
the next few years. While the impact will still be 
strong from the middle of the 2020s, it probably 
won’t be quite as high as in the earlier years. 
One of the main reasons is that as productivity 
in China begins to catch up with North America, 
this will stimulate exports of AI-enabled products 
from China to North America.
China
The high proportion of Chinese GDP that comes 
from manufacturing heightens the potential 
uplift from introducing more productive 
technologies. It is likely to take some time to 
build up the technology and expertise needed 
to implement these capabilities and therefore 
the GDP boost won’t be as rapid as the US. But in 
around ten years’ time, the productivity gains in 
China could begin to pull ahead.
A key part of the value potential comes from the 
higher rate of capital re-investment within the 
Chinese economy compared to Europe and North 
America, as profits from Chinese businesses are 
fed into increasing AI capabilities and returns. 
AI will also play an important part in the shift to 
a more consumer-oriented economy on the one 
hand and the move up the value chain into more 
sophisticated and high tech-driven manufacturing 
and commerce on the other. The focus and 
investment are amply demonstrated by the surge 
in AI patents filed in China 3. An acceleration in 
talent development in areas such as analytics will 
be crucial in realising the potential gains from AI 
within the Chinese economy. 
North America 
is likely to see 
the fastest 
boost in the 
next few years.
3  China is now second behind the US in AI patent filings, a key indicator of long-term trends in technology. Source: ‘The Global Race for 
Artificial Intelligence – Comparison of Patenting Trends’, Wilson Center, 1 March 2017 (https://www.wilsoncenter.org/blog-post/the-
global-race-for-artificial-intelligence-comparison-patenting-trends) 
Critical assumptions
Our estimates reflect certain assumptions, which we will stress-test 
in our forthcoming detailed economic assessment. What happens if 
the pace of AI adoption is faster/slower in particular countries, for 
example? How does that affect the distribution of global growth? What 
happens if estimated changes in product quality do not materialise? A 
slowdown in the pace of AI uptake would delay the benefits that feed 
through to labour productivity. We see this as a key driver to both the 
timing and the overall impact of AI on GDP.
We’re currently exploring the quantitative effect of several key 
scenarios. This includes examining alternate combinations of input 
parameters, as well as the timing of AI uptake. These sensitivity tests 
are designed to help better understand the risks around our results, 
while providing more insight into the parameters that drive the 
relationship between AI and economic growth. We plan to present the 
results of several scenarios in our detailed economic assessment.
8
Sizing the prizeAutomation in action
An online insurer has leveraged an AI bot to automate the claims process 
from beginning to end. Instead of the days or even months it traditionally 
took to settle a claim, the bot is able to complete the entire pipeline from 
claims receipt, policy reference, fraud detection, payout and notification 
to customers in just three seconds. When rolled out at scale, this solution is 
poised to have a huge impact on the insurance industry.
How to respond?
If your business is operating in one of the sectors 
or economies that is gearing up for fast adoption 
of AI, you’ll have to move quickly if you want 
to capitalise on the openings, and ensure your 
business doesn’t lose out to faster-moving and more 
cost-efficient competitors.
If you’re in one of the sectors or economies where 
the disruptive potential is lower and adoption 
likely to be slower, there is still a significant 
challenge ahead – no sector or business is in any 
way immune from the impact of AI. In fact, the 
potential for innovation and differentiation could 
be all the greater because fewer market players are 
currently focusing on AI. The big question is how to 
secure the talent, technology and access to data to 
make the most of this opportunity. 
Doing nothing is not a feasible option. It’s easy to 
dismiss a lot of what’s said about AI as hype. Yet as our 
analysis underlines, without decisive response, many 
well established enterprises and even whole business 
models are at risk of being rendered obsolete.
In the short-term, many of the opportunities 
and threats are likely to focus on productivity, 
efficiency and cost – the transformative phase. 
If you’re the CEO of a transport and logistics 
company, for example, you’re already seeing the 
impact of robots within packing and fulfilment 
operations. The bigger disruption will emerge 
when the sector switches to autonomous trucking. 
Are you in a position to move ahead of your 
competitors? What are the openings for vehicle 
manufacturers, technology companies and other 
potential new entrants to make inroads in your 
market? Could your business be at risk of becoming 
obsolete if you don’t move quickly enough?
Source: PwC AI specialists
Figure 3: How quickly will AI impact productivity?
North America and China are 
expected to witness the 
greatest GDP gains from AI 
increasing productivity, but the 
trajectory of the impact for the 
two countries diﬀers. 
China will likely 
uptake AI technology 
more slowly but could 
see a large impact on 
GDP by 2030.
North America
 is expected to 
realise the majority 
of AI beneﬁts faster.
9
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?AI is set to be the key source of transformation, 
disruption and competitive advantage in today’s 
fast changing economy. Drawing on the findings 
of our AI Impact Index, we look at how quickly 
change is coming and where your business can 
expect the greatest return.
In the research carried out for this report, we’ve 
drilled down to the sector-by-sector and product-
by-product impact of AI to enable your business to 
target the opportunities, pinpoint the threats and 
judge how to address them. 
AI Impact Index: 
Targeting and 
timing your 
investment
The unique analysis within PwC’s AI Impact 
Index includes a rating for the potential to free 
up time and enhance quality and personalisation. 
We’ve used this analysis to create nearly 300 use 
cases setting out the openings for innovation, the 
drivers, timings and current feasibility of market 
adoption, what could hold this up and how these 
barriers could be overcome. 
The areas with the biggest potential and 
associated timelines we outline at a high level 
here are designed to help your business target 
investment in the short to medium term. Some 
aspects of change, such as robotic doctors, could 
be even more revolutionary, but are further off. 
10
Sizing the prizePotential AI  
Consumption Impact
Sector Subsector
Healthcare  3.7 
Providers/Health Services 
Pharma/Life Sciences 
Insurance 
Consumer Health 
Automotive  3.7 
Aftermarket & Repair 
Component suppliers 
Personal Mobility as a Service 
OEM 
Financing 
Financial Services   3.3 
Asset Wealth Management 
Banking and Capital 
Insurance 
Transportation and Logistics  3.2 
Transportation 
Logistics 
Technology, Communications and Entertainment  3.1 
Technology 
Entertainment, Media and 
Communication 
Retail  3.0 
Consumer Products 
Retail 
Energy   2.2 
Oil & Gas 
Power & Utilities 
Manufacturing  2.2 
Industrial manufacturing 
Industrial Products/Raw Materials 
Grand Total  3.1 
Figure 4: What’s the potential impact for your sector?
Scores based on PwC’s AI impact index evaluation. Potential scores range from 1-5, with 5 indicating the highest potential impact due to AI, and 1 being the lowest.
Healthcare: 3.7
37% 23% 40%
Automotive: 3.7
35% 47% 18%
Financial Services: 3.3
41% 59% 0%
Transportation and Logistics: 3.2
41% 41% 17%
Retail: 3.0
54% 38% 8%
Energy: 2.2
39% 44% 17%
Manufacturing: 2.2
14% 83% 3%
Technology, Communications and Entertainment: 3.1
47% 36% 17%
 % Adoption maturity – Near term (0-3 yr)
 % Adoption maturity – Mid term (3-7 yr)
 % Adoption maturity – Long term (7+ yr)
11
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?Healthcare
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Supporting diagnosis in areas such as 
detecting small variations from the baseline in 
patients’ health data or comparison with 
similar patients.
• Early identification of potential pandemics and 
tracking incidence of the disease to help 
prevent and contain its spread.
• Imaging diagnostics (radiology, pathology).
Consumer benefits
Faster and more accurate diagnoses and more 
personalised treatment in the short and medium-
term, which would pave the way for longer-
term breakthroughs in areas such as intelligent 
implants. Ultimate benefits are improved health 
and lives saved.
Time saved
More effective prevention helps reduce the risk 
of illness and hospitalisation. In turn, faster 
detection and diagnosis would allow for earlier 
intervention. 
Timing 
Ready to go: Medical insurance and smarter 
scheduling (e.g. appointments and operations).
Medium-term potential:  Data-driven 
diagnostics and virtual drug development.
Longer-term potential:  Robot doctors carrying 
out diagnosis and treatment.
Barriers to overcome
It would be necessary to address concerns over 
the privacy and protection of sensitive health 
data. The complexity of human biology and the 
need for further technological development 
also mean than some of the more advanced 
applications may take time to reach their 
potential and gain acceptance from patients, 
healthcare providers and regulators.
High potential use case: Data-based 
diagnostic support
AI-powered diagnostics use the patient’s unique 
history as a baseline against which small 
deviations flag a possible health condition in 
need of further investigation and treatment. AI 
is initially likely to be adopted as an aid, rather 
than replacement, for human physicians. It will 
augment physicians’ diagnoses, but in the process 
also provide valuable insights for the AI to learn 
continuously and improve. This continuous 
interaction between human physicians and the 
AI-powered diagnostics will enhance the accuracy 
of the systems and, over time, provide enough 
confidence for humans to delegate the task 
entirely to the AI system to operate autonomously.
Supporting 
diagnosis in 
one of the areas 
in healthcare 
with the biggest 
potential
12
Sizing the prizeAutomotive
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Autonomous fleets for ride sharing.
• Semi-autonomous features such as driver assist.
• Engine monitoring and predictive, 
autonomous maintenance.
Consumer benefit
A machine to drive you around and ‘on-demand’ 
flexibility – for example a small model to get you 
through a city or a bigger and more powerful 
vehicle to go away in for the weekend.
Time saved
The average American spends nearly 300 hours 
a year driving4 – think what you could with 
that time if you didn’t have to spend it behind 
the wheel.
Timing 
Ready to go: Automated driver assistance 
systems (e.g. parking assist, lane centring, 
adaptive cruise control etc.).
Medium-term potential:  On-demand parts 
manufacturing and maintenance.
Longer-term potential:  Engine monitoring and 
predictive, autonomous maintenance.
Barriers to overcome
Technology still needs development – having an 
autonomous vehicle perform safely under extreme 
weather conditions might prove more challenging. 
Even if the technology is in place, it would need to 
gain consumer trust and regulatory acceptance.
High potential use case: Autonomous 
fleets for ride sharing
Autonomous fleets would enable travellers to 
access the vehicle they need at that point, rather 
than having to make do with what they have or 
pay for insurance and maintenance on a car that 
sits in the drive for much of the time. Most of 
the necessary data is available and technology is 
advancing. However, businesses still need to win 
consumer trust.
Predictive engine 
monitoring and 
maintenance 
technology is 
advancing.
4  American Automobile Association media release 8 September 2016 (http://newsroom.aaa.com/2016/09/americans-spend-average-17600-min-
utes-driving-year/)
13
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?Financial services
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Personalised financial planning.
• Fraud detection and anti-money laundering.
• Process automation – not just back office 
functions, but customer facing operations  
as well.
Consumer benefit
More customised and holistic (e.g. health, wealth 
and retirement) solutions, which make money 
work harder (e.g. channelling surplus funds into 
investment plans) and adapt as consumer needs 
change (e.g. change in income or new baby).
Timing 
Ready to go: Robo-advice, automated insurance 
underwriting and robotic process automation in 
areas such as finance and compliance.
Medium-term potential: Optimised product 
design based on consumer sentiment and 
preferences.
Longer-term potential: Moving from 
anticipating what will happen and when in areas 
such as an insurable loss (predictive analytics) 
to proactively shaping the outcome (prescriptive 
analytics) in areas such as reduced accident rates 
or improved consumer outcomes.
Time saved
The information customers need to fully 
understand financial position and plan for the 
future is at their fingertips and adapts to changing 
circumstances. Businesses can support this by 
developing customised solutions rather than 
expecting consumers to sift through multiple 
options to find the one that’s appropriate. 
Barriers to overcome
Consumer trust and regulatory acceptance.
High potential use case: Personalised 
financial planning
While human financial advice is costly and time-
consuming, AI developments such as robo-advice 
have made it possible to develop customised 
investment solutions for mass market consumers 
in ways that would, until recently, only have been 
available to high net worth clients. Finances are 
managed dynamically to match goals (e.g. saving 
for a mortgage) and optimise client’s available 
funds, as asset managers become augmented and, 
in some cases, replaced by AI. The technology and 
data is in place, though customer acceptance would 
still need to increase to realise the full potential. 
Businesses can 
develop 
customised 
solutions 
rather than 
expecting 
consumers to 
sift through 
multiple 
options to find 
the one that’s 
appropriate.
Assisted intelligence in action
A financial services organisation used machine learning 
to develop time-series clusters of their policyholder 
transactions. The machine learning solution helped 
the company to identify common customer transaction 
patterns and better understand the key triggers driving 
variances. Combining policyholder data with external 
data on customer preferences, financial literacy, and 
other behavioural dimensions allowed the firm to better 
predict which patterns would occur for each customer 
persona. The organisation designed interventions around 
these insights, which opened the way for improved 
outcomes for both the customer and the company. 
Source: PwC AI specialists
14
Sizing the prizeRetail
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Personalised design and production.
• Anticipating customer demand – for example, 
retailers are beginning to use deep learning to 
predict customers’ orders in advance.
• Inventory and delivery management. 
Consumer benefit
On-demand customisation as the norm and 
greater availability of what you want, when and 
how you want it.
Timing 
Ready to go: Product recommendation base on 
preferences.
Medium-term potential:  Fully customised 
products.
Longer-term potential:  Products that anticipate 
demand from market signals.
Time saved
Less time exploring shelves, catalogues and 
websites to find the product that you want.
Barriers to overcome
Adapting design and production to this more agile 
and tailored approach. Businesses also need to 
strengthen trust over data usage and protection. 
High potential use case: Personalised 
design and production 
Instead of being produced uniformly, apparels 
and consumables can be tailored on demand. If 
we look at fashion and clothing as an example, 
we could eventually move to fully interactive and 
customised design and supply in which AI created 
mock-ups of garments are sold online, made in 
small batches using automated production, and 
subsequent changes are made to design based on 
user feedback.
Retailers are 
beginning to 
use deep 
learning to 
predict 
customers’ 
orders in 
advance.
15
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?Technology, communications and entertainment
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Media archiving and search – bringing 
together diffuse content for recommendation.
• Customised content creation (marketing, film, 
music, etc.).
• Personalised marketing and advertising.
Consumer benefit
Increasingly personalised content generation, 
recommendation and supply.
Timing 
Ready to go: Content recommendation for 
consumers.
Medium-term potential:  Automated 
telemarketing capable of holding a real 
conversation with the customer.
Longer-term potential: Use-case specific and 
individualised AI-created content.
Time saved
Quicker and easier for consumers to choose what 
they want, reflecting their preferences and mood 
at the time.
Barriers to overcome
Cutting through the noise when there is so much 
data, much of it unstructured.
High potential use case: Media archiving 
and search 
We already have personalised content 
recommendation within the entertainment sector. 
Yet there is now so much existing and newly 
generated (e.g. online video) content that it can 
be difficult to tag, recommend and monetise. AI 
offers more efficient options for classification and 
archiving of this huge vault of assets, paving the 
way for more precise targeting and increased 
revenue generation.
16
Sizing the prizeManufacturing
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Enhanced monitoring and auto-correction 
of manufacturing processes.
• Supply chain and production optimisation.
• On-demand production.
Consumer benefit
Indirect benefits from more flexible, responsive 
and custom-made manufacturing of goods, 
with fewer delays, fewer defects and faster 
deliver y. 
Timing 
Ready to go: Greater automation of a large 
number of production processes.
Medium-term potential:  Intelligent 
automation in areas ranging from supply chain 
optimisation to more predictive scheduling.
Longer-term potential:  Using prescriptive 
analytics in product design – solving problems 
and shaping outcomes, rather than simply 
predicting and responding to demand in 
product design.
AI will facilitate 
more seamless 
integration of 
supply chain 
data, enabling 
anticipatory 
production and 
more efficient 
delivery of 
products to 
customers.
Time saved
Faster response and fewer delays.
Barriers to overcome
Making the most of supply chain and production 
opportunities requires all parties to have the 
necessary technology and be ready to collaborate. 
Only the biggest and best-resourced suppliers and 
manufacturers are up to speed at present. 
High potential use case: Enhanced 
monitoring and auto-correction 
Self-learning monitoring makes the 
manufacturing process more predictable and 
controllable, reducing costly delays, defects or 
deviation from product specifications. There 
is huge amount of data available right through 
the manufacturing process, which allows for 
intelligent monitoring.
17
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?Energy
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Smart metering – real-time information on 
energy usage, helping to reduce bills.
• More efficient grid operation and storage.
• Predictive infrastructure maintenance.
Consumer benefit
More efficient and cost-effective supply and usage 
of energy.
Timing 
Ready to go: Smart metering.
Medium-term potential:  Optimised power 
management.
Longer-term potential: More efficient and 
consistent renewable energy supply in areas 
such as improved prediction and optimisation of 
wind power.
Time saved
More secure supply and fewer outages.
Barriers to overcome
Technological development and high investment 
requirements in some of the more advanced areas.
High potential use case: Smart meters 
Smart meters help customers tailor their energy 
consumption and reduce costs. Greater usage 
would also open up a massive source of data, 
which could pave the way for more customised 
tariffs and more efficient supply.
18
Sizing the prizeTransport and logistics
Three areas with the biggest AI potential
• Autonomous trucking and delivery.
• Traffic control and reduced congestion.
• Enhanced security.
Consumer benefit
Greater flexibility, customisation and choice in 
how goods and people move around and the 
ability to get from A to B faster and more reliably. 
Timing 
Ready to go: Automated picking in warehouses.
Medium-term potential:  Traffic control.
Longer-term potential:  Autonomous trucking 
and deliver y.
Time saved
Smart scheduling, fewer traffic jams and real-time 
route adjustment to speed up transport.
Barriers to overcome
Technology for autonomous fleets is still in 
development.
High potential use case: Traffic control 
and reduced congestion
Autonomous trucking reduces costs by allowing 
for increased asset utilisation as 24/7 runtimes 
are possible. Moreover, the whole business 
model of transport & logistics (T&L) might be 
disrupted by new market entrants such as truck 
manufacturers offering T&L and large online 
retailers vertically integrating their T&L. 
Augmented intelligence in action
An automotive company developed a dynamic agent-based 
model to simulate thousands of strategic scenarios for entering 
the ridesharing market. The model allowed key decision makers 
to test a variety of policy configurations in a virtual, risk-free 
simulated environment to help them understand the ultimate 
impact on market share and revenue over time, before actually 
making any decisions. Flight simulators allow pilots to test the 
impact of their decisions in a virtual environment to better 
prepare them for making decisions in flight, so why shouldn’t 
business executives do the same?
Source: PwC AI specialists
19
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?What do you want from AI? Where do you begin? 
How do you keep pace with change?
1/Work out what AI means for your 
business 
The starting point for strategic evaluation is a scan 
of the technological developments and competitive 
pressures coming up within your sector, how 
quickly they will arrive, and how you will respond. 
You can then identify the operational pain points 
that automation and other AI techniques could 
address, what disruptive opportunities are opened 
up by the AI that’s available now, and what’s 
coming up on the horizon. 
2/Prioritise your response
In determining your strategic response, key 
questions include how can different AI options 
help you to deliver your business goals and what 
is your appetite and readiness for change. Do 
you want to be an early adopter, fast follower 
or follower? Is your strategic objective for AI to 
transform your business or to disrupt your sector?
AI provides the potential to enhance quality, 
personalisation, consistency and time saved, but 
it’s also important to consider the technological 
feasiblity of AI and the availability of the data 
needed to support AI. How are you planning to 
overcome barriers and accelerate innovation?
Realising  
the potential:
To prioritise your response, it’s important to 
map the key process flows to be automated and 
decision flows to be augmented. What functions 
contain high potential processes that could drive 
near-term savings, for example? As data becomes 
the primary asset and source of intellectual 
property, what investments and changes would 
enable you to capture more data and use it 
more productively? With this map in place, you 
can then develop the cost-benefit analysis for 
automation and augmentation.
AI is applicable across all elements of the 
value chain, which can lead to multiple silos of 
initiatives or confusion in finding a good starting 
point. Developing the insight, governance and 
organisational collaboration to pick your spot and 
drive initiatives forward are therefore critical.
To prioritise 
your response, 
it’s important 
to map the key 
process flows 
to be 
automated and 
decision flows 
to be 
augmented.
20
Sizing the prize3/Make sure you have the right talent 
and culture, as well as technology
While investment in AI may seem expensive now, 
PwC subject matter specialists anticipate that the 
costs will decline over the next ten years as the 
software becomes more commoditised. Eventually, 
we’ll move towards a free (or ‘freemium’ model) 
for simple activities, and a premium model for 
business-differentiating services. While the 
enabling technology is likely to be increasingly 
commoditised, the supply of data and how it’s used 
are set to become the primary asset. 
To make the most effective use of this technology, 
it’s important to instil a data-driven culture that 
blends intuition and analytical insights with a focus 
on practical and actionable decisions across all levels.
Demand for data scientists, robotics engineers and 
other tech specialists is clearly growing. These 
are in short supply, especially in less developed 
markets according to the interviews we carried 
out with PwC’s data and analytics’ regional 
leaders, so it will be important to gear long-term 
training and development to these emerging 
needs. As adoption of AI gathers pace, the value of 
skills that can’t be replicated by machines is also 
increasing. These include creativity, leadership and 
emotional intelligence5.
It’s important to prepare for a hybrid workforce 
in which AI and human beings work side-by-side. 
The challenge for your business isn’t just ensuring 
you have the right systems in place, but judging 
what role your people will play in this new model. 
People will need to be responsible for determining 
the strategic application of AI and providing 
challenge and oversight to decisions.
4/Build in appropriate governance 
and control
Trust and transparency are critical. In relation 
to autonomous vehicles, for example, AI requires 
people to trust their lives to a machine – that’s a 
huge leap of faith for both passengers and public 
policymakers. Anything that goes wrong, be it a 
malfunction or a crash, is headline news. And this 
reputational risk applies to all forms of AI, not 
just autonomous vehicles. Customer engagement 
robots have been known to acquire biases through 
training or even manipulation, for example. 
AI should therefore be managed with the same 
discipline as any other technology enabled 
transformation. Key questions to ask while 
building AI include: 
• Have you considered the societal and ethical 
implications?
• How can you build stakeholder trust in the 
solution? 
• How can you build AI that can explain its logic 
so that a lay person can understand?
• How can you build AI that is unbiased and 
transparent?
It’s important to put in place mechanisms to 
source, cleanse and control key data inputs and 
ensure data and AI management are integrated.
Transparency is not only important in guarding 
against biases within the AI, but also helping to 
increase human understanding of what the AI can 
do and how to use it most effectively.
We further explore business strategies for an 
AI world in ‘A strategist’s guide to artificial 
intelligence’ (https:/ /www.strategy-business.
com/article/A-Strategists-Guide-to-Artificial-
Intelligence?gko=0abb5).
It’s important 
to prepare for 
a hybrid 
workforce in 
which AI and 
human beings 
work side-by-
side.
Autonomous intelligence in action
Entertainment industry consumers now have an unprecedented 
choice of movies, television, music and games. While this 
provides consumers with more opportunity to enjoy content 
specific to their unique tastes, they can experience ‘choice 
overload’ during their search. And worse, sometimes they make 
no choice at all! Video and music streaming companies have 
begun using autonomous recommendation engines that combine 
segment trends, ratings and content similarity to personalise 
suggestions and engage customers. Engaging customers not only 
increases retention, but also allows companies to collect more 
data on individuals and improve the personalisation of offerings 
– creating a virtuous feedback loop that provides a significant 
competitive advantage.
5  We explore AI’s role in this creative process in ‘AI is already entertaining you’, strategy+business, 1 May 2017 (https://www.strategy-business.com/
article/AI-Is-Already-Entertaining-You?gko=dc252)
Source: PwC AI specialists
21
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?Conclusion:
The options for 
survival and success 
22
Sizing the prizePicture your market in five years’ time. How 
can you create the capabilities to compete?
As our analysis underlines, AI has the potential 
to fundamentally disrupt your market through 
the creation of innovative new services and 
entirely new business models. We’ve already 
seen the creative destruction of the first wave 
of digitisation. With the eruption of AI, some of 
the market leaders in ten, even five years’ time 
may be companies you’ve never heard of. In turn, 
some of today’s biggest commercial names could 
be struggling to sustain relevance or have even 
disappeared altogether, if their response has been 
too little or too late. 
Tomorrow’s market leaders are likely to be 
exploring the possibilities and setting their 
strategies today. We believe there are four key 
questions your business should address if it wants 
to keep pace and capitalise on the opportunities:
• How vulnerable is your business model to AI 
disruption? How soon will the change arrive? 
• Are there game-changing openings within 
your market and, if so, how can you take 
advantage? 
• Do you have the right talent, data and 
technology to help you understand and 
execute on the AI opportunities?
• How can you build trust and transparency into 
your AI platforms and applications?
Get this right and creativity, collaboration and 
decision making within your organisation can 
all be empowered. You’ll have the potential to 
understand customer behaviour and anticipate 
and respond to their individual needs with a 
precision and foresight that have never been 
possible before. 
The ultimate commercial potential of AI is doing 
things that have never been done before, rather 
than simply automating or accelerating existing 
capabilities. Some of the strategic options that 
emerge won’t match past experience or gut 
feelings. As a business leader, you may therefore 
have to take a leap of faith. The prize is being far 
more capable, in a far more relevant way, than 
your business could ever be without the infinite 
possibilities of AI.
The prize is 
being far more 
capable, in a 
far more 
relevant way, 
than your 
business could 
ever be without 
the infinite 
possibilities 
of AI.
23
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?Helping your 
business to make 
the most of AI
PwC is already working with companies across 
each of the different sectors highlighted in this 
report, to help them plan for and take advantage 
of AI to support their business strategy and 
improve performance. 
If you would be interested in a consultation about 
the potential within your business, please feel 
free to get in touch.
Gerard Verweij
Global & US Data & Analytics Leader, PwC US
T: +1 (617) 530 7015 
E: gerard.verweij@pwc.com 
Twitter: @gverweij
Euan Cameron
Artificial Intelligence Leader, PwC UK
T: +44 (0)20 7804 3554
E: euan.cameron@pwc.com 
Twitter: @euancameron55
Anand Rao
Global Leader of Artificial Intelligence, PwC 
T: +1 (617) 530 4691
E: anand.s.rao@pwc.com
Twitter: @AnandSRao
24 Sizing the prizeAuthors
Dr. Anand S. Rao and Gerard Verweij
The authors would like to acknowledge the 
contribution of:
• Alan Morrison
• Barbara Lix
• Cathryn Marsh 
• Chengyao Gu
• Chris Curran
• Craig Scalise
• Cristina Ampil
• Edmond Lee
• Hugh Dance
• John Ashworth
• John Hawksworth
• John Sviokla 
• Jonathan Gillham
• Katherine Barnard Roberts
• Lucy Rimmington
• Mark Paich 
• Michael Schneider
• Pia Ramchandani
• Shivanghi Jain
We would also like to thank our academic 
and applied research partners at 
Fraunhofer, and especially Fraunhofer Big 
Data Alliance, with contributions from the 
following institutes:
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Intelligent Analysis & 
Information Systems IAIS
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information 
Technology FIT
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication 
Systems FOKUS
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media 
Technology IDMT
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Experimental Software 
Engineering IESE
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Material Flow and 
Logistics IML
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Transportation and 
Infrastructure Systems IVI
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and 
Scientific Computing SCAI 
•  Fraunhofer Working Group for Supply Chain 
Services IIS-SCS 
•  Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy 
Systems ISE
6  Examples include our article, ‘Will robots steal our jobs? The potential impact of automation on the UK and other major economies? 
(https://www.pwc.co.uk/economic-services/ukeo/pwcukeo-section-4-automation-march-2017-v2.pdf)
What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise? 25Glossary
Main AI areas Description
Large-scale Machine Learning Design of learning algorithms, as well as scaling existing algorithms, to work with 
extremely large data sets.
Deep Learning Model composed of inputs such as image or audio and several hidden layers of  
sub-models that serve as input for the next layer and ultimately an output or  
activation function.
Natural Language Processing 
(NLP)
Algorithms that process human language input and convert it into understandable 
representations.
Collaborative Systems Models and algorithms to help develop autonomous systems that can work 
collaboratively with other systems and with humans.
Computer Vision (Image 
Analytics)
The process of pulling relevant information from an image or sets of images for 
advanced classification and analysis.
Algorithmic Game Theory and 
Computational Social Choice
Systems that address the economic and social computing dimensions of AI, such as 
how systems can handle potentially misaligned incentives, including self-interested 
human participants or firms and the automated AI-based agents representing them.
Soft Robotics (Robotic Process 
Automation)
Automation of repetitive tasks and common processes such as IT, customer servicing 
and sales without the need to transform existing IT system maps.
AI consists of a number of areas, including but not limited to those below:
26 Sizing the prizeThe basis for  
our analysis
AI Impact Index
Our sector specialists worked with market 
participants and our partners at Fraunhofer to 
identify and evaluate use cases across five criteria:
• Potential to enhance personalisation.
• Potential to enhance quality (utility value).
• Potential to enhance consistency.
• Potential to save time for consumers.
• Availability of data to make these gains possible.
Specific scoring parameters were derived for 
each criterion. We also evaluated technological 
feasibility. The results helped us to gauge time 
to adoption, potential barriers and how they can 
be overcome.
Economic analysis 
We used a multi-stage approach to first evaluate 
how much AI would proliferate in different 
regions of the world and how much this would 
affect jobs through automation, and second 
to assess how much this would impact the key 
elements of the economy.
To do this we used a combination of machine 
learning and econometrics techniques.
• We followed a similar approach to the best 
practice we’ve used in job automation 
research6. We used a machine learning 
approach to assess the likelihood that a job can 
be automated based on the specific 
tasks involved.
• We used econometric analysis to assess how 
much automation would impact productivity. 
We use the KLEMS datasets (K-capital, 
L-labour, E-energy, M-materials, and 
S-purchased services) and quantified the 
relationship between the use of AI technologies 
and productivity in different regions and 
industries.
• We also drew insights from the AI Impact 
Index and used academic literature on 
personalisation and marginal utility to 
quantify the effect that AI will have on 
consumers’ utility, choices available to them 
and the amount of time they would save.
• We brought all of this together into a global 
dynamic computable general equilibrium 
(CGE) model, an economic model of 
interactions between consumers, businesses 
and governments. Through this model, we 
analysed the total economic impact of AI 
focusing on the ‘net’ impact, accounting for 
the creation of new jobs, a boost to demand 
from product enhancements and other 
secondary effects.
27What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capitalise?At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms in 157 countries with more than 223,000 people who are 
committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory and tax services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
This publication has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only, and does not constitute professional advice. You should not act upon the 
information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation or warranty (express or implied) is given as to the 
accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this publication, and, to the extent permitted by law, PwC does not accept or assume any liability, 
responsibility or duty of care for any consequences of you or anyone else acting, or refraining to act, in reliance on the information contained in this publication or 
for any decision based on it. 
© 2017 PwC. All rights reserved. “PwC” refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity. Please see 
www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
170905-115740-GK-OS
www .pwc.com/ AI